# Build System Maintainers Guide

The latest version of this document is available at
https://android.googlesource.com/platform/ndk/+/master/docs/BuildSystemMaintainers.md.
Ensure that you are using the version that corresponds to your NDK. Replace
`master` in the URL with the appropriate NDK release branch. For example, the NDK
r19 version of this document is located at
https://android.googlesource.com/platform/ndk/+/ndk-release-r19/docs/BuildSystemMaintainers.md.

The purpose of this guide is to instruct third-party build system maintainers in
adding NDK support to their build systems. This guide will not be useful to most
NDK users. NDK users should start with [Building Your Project].

Note: This guide is written assuming Linux is the host OS. Mac should be no
different, and the only difference on Windows is that file extensions for
executables and scripts will differ.

[Building Your Project]: https://developer.android.com/ndk/guides/build

[TOC]

## Introduction

The NDK uses the [LLVM] family of tools for building C/C++ code. These include
[Clang] for compilation, [LLD] for linking, and other [LLVM tools] for other
tasks.

[Clang]: https://clang.llvm.org/
[LLD]: https://lld.llvm.org/
[LLVM tools]: https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/
[LLVM]: https://llvm.org/

### Architectures
[Architectures]: #architectures

Note: In general an architecture may have multiple ABIs. An ABI (application
binary interface) is different from an architecture in that it also specifies a
calling convention, size and alignment of types, and other implementation
details. For Android, each architecture supports only one ABI.

Android supports multiple architectures: ARM32, ARM64, x86, and x86_64. NDK
applications must build libraries for every architecture they support. 64-bit
devices usually also support the 32-bit variant of their architecture, but this
may not always be the case. While in general this means that an app with only
32-bit libraries can run on 64-bit capable devices, the 64-bit ABI will have
improved performance.

This document will make use of `<arch>`, `<ABI>`, and `<triple>` in describing
paths and arguments. The values of these variables for each architecture are as
follows except where otherwise noted:

| Name         | arch    | ABI         | triple                |
| ------------ | ------- | ----------- | --------------------- |
| 32-bit ARMv7 | arm     | armeabi-v7a | arm-linux-androideabi |
| 64-bit ARMv8 | aarch64 | aarch64-v8a | aarch64-linux-android |
| 32-bit Intel | x86     | x86         | i686-linux-android    |
| 64-bit Intel | x86_64  | x86_64      | x86_64-linux-android  |

Note: Strictly speaking ARMv7 with [NEON] is a different ABI from ARMv7 without
NEON, but it is not a *system* ABI. Both NEON and non-NEON ARMv7 code uses the
ARMv7 system and toolchains.

To programatically determine the list of supported ABIs, their bitness, as well
as their deprecation status and whether or not it is recommended to build them
by default, use `<NDK>/meta/abis.json`.

### Thumb

32-bit ARM can be built using either the [Thumb] or ARM instruction sets. Thumb
code is smaller but may perform worse than ARM. However, smaller code makes more
effective use of a processor's instruction cache, so benchmarking is necessary
to determine which is more effective for a given application. ndk-build and the
NDK's CMake toolchain file generate Thumb code by default.

The ARM or Thumb instruction sets are selected by passing `-marm` or `-mthumb`
to Clang respectively. By default, Clang will generate ARM code as opposed to
Thumb for the `armv7a-linux-androideabi` target.

Note: For ARMv7, Thumb-2 is used. Android no longer supports ARMv5, but if your
build system mistakenly targets ARMv5 the less efficient Thumb-1 will be used.

[Thumb]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ARM_architecture#Thumb-2

### NEON

Most ARM Android devices support [NEON]. This is supported by all 64-bit ARM
devices and nearly all 32-bit ARM devices running at least Android Marshmallow
(API 23). The [Android CDD] has required NEON support since that version, but it
is possible that extant devices that were upgraded to Marshmallow do not include
NEON support.

NEON can significantly improve application performance.

Clang automatically enables NEON for all API levels. ARM devices without NEON
are uncommon. To support non-NEON devices, pass `-mfpu=vfpv3-d16` when
compiling. Alternatively, use the Play Console to [exclude CPUs] without NEON
to disallow your app from being installed on those devices.

[Android CDD]: https://source.android.com/compatibility/cdd
[NEON]: https://developer.arm.com/technologies/neon
[exclude CPUs]: https://support.google.com/googleplay/android-developer/answer/7353455?hl=en

### OS Versions
[OS Versions]: #os-versions

As users are distributed over a wide variety of Android OS versions (see the
[Distribution dashboard]), applications have a minimum and maximum supported
version, as well as a targeted version. These are `minSdkVersion`,
`maxSdkVersion`, and `targetSdkVersion` respectively. See the [uses-sdk]
documentation for more information.

For NDK code, the only relevant value is the minimum supported version. Any time
this doc refers to an API level, OS version, or target version, it is referring
to the application's `minSdkVersion`.

The API level targeted by an NDK application determines which APIs will be
exposed for use by the application. By default, APIs that are not present in the
targeted API level cannot be linked directly, but may be accessed via `dlsym`.
An NDK application running on a device with an API level lower than the target
will often not load at all. If it does load, it may not behave as expected. This
is not a supported configuration. This behavior can be altered by following the
section about [weak symbols]. Be sure your users understand the implications of
doing so.

The major/minor version number given to an Android OS has no meaning when it
comes to determining its API level. See the table in the [Build numbers]
document to map Android code names and version numbers to API levels.

Note: Not every API level includes new NDK APIs. If there were no new NDK APIs
for the given API level, there is no library directory for that API level. In
that case, the build system should select the closest available API that is
below the target API level. For example, applications with a `minSdkVersion` of
20 should use API 19 for their NDK target.

To programatically determine the list of supported API levels as well as aliases
that are accepted by ndk-build and CMake, see `<NDK>/meta/platforms.json`.

Note: In some contexts the API level may be referred to as a platform. In this
document an API level is always an integer, and a platform takes the form of
`android-<API level>`. The latter format is not specifically used anywhere in
the NDK toolchain, but is used to specify target API levels for ndk-build and
CMake.

Note: As a new version of the Android OS approaches release, previews and betas
of that OS will be released and an NDK will be released that can make use of the
new APIs. Targeting a preview API level is no different than targeting a
released API level, with the exception that applications built targeting preview
releases should not be shipped to production. Consult
`<NDK>/meta/platforms.json` to determine the API level for a preview release.

[Build numbers]: https://source.android.com/setup/start/build-numbers
[Distribution dashboard]: https://developer.android.com/about/dashboards/
[uses-sdk]: https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/manifest/uses-sdk-element
[weak symbols]: #weak-symbols-for-api-definitions

## Clang

Clang is installed to `<NDK>/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/<host-tag>/bin/clang`.
The C++ compiler is installed as `clang++` in the same directory. `clang++` will
make C++ headers available when compiling and will automatically link the C++
runtime libraries when linking.

`clang` should be used when compiling C source files, and `clang++` should be
used when compiling C++ source files. When linking, `clang` should be used if
the binary being linked contains no C++ code (i.e. none of the object files
being linked were generated from C++ files) and `clang++` should be used
otherwise. Using `clang++` ensures that the C++ standard library is linked.

When linking a shared library, the `-Wl,-soname,$NAME_OF_LIBRARY` argument is
required. This is necessary to avoid the problems described in [this stack
overflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/a/48291044/632035). For example, when
building `libapp.so`, `-Wl,-soname,libapp.so` must be used.

### Target Selection

[Cross-compilation] targets can be selected in one of two ways: by using
the `--target` flag, or by using target-specific wrapper scripts.

If possible, we recommend using the `--target` flag, which is described more
fully in the [Clang User Manual]. The value passed is a Clang target
triple suffixed with an Android API level. For example, to target API 26 for
32-bit ARM, use `--target armv7a-linux-androideabi26`.

Note: "armv7a" should be used rather than simply "arm" when specifying targets
for Clang to generate ARMv7 code rather than the slower ARMv5 code. Specifying
ARMv5 and thumb code generation will result in Thumb-1 being generated rather
than Thumb-2, which is less efficient.

If not possible to use the `--target` flag, we supply wrapper scripts alongside
the `clang` and `clang++` binaries, named `<triple><API-level>-clang` and
`<triple><API-level>-clang++`. For example, to target API 26 32-bit ARM,
invoke `armv7a-linux-androideabi26-clang` or
`armv7a-linux-androideabi26-clang++` instead of `clang` or `clang++`. These
wrappers come in two forms: Bash scripts (for Mac, Linux, Cygwin, and WSL) and
Windows batch files (with `.cmd` extensions).

Note: For projects with many source files, the wrapper scripts may cause
noticeable overhead, which is why we recommend using `--target`. The overhead
is most significant on Windows, as `CreateProcess` is slower than `fork`.

For more information on Android targets, see the [Architectures] and [OS
Versions] sections.

[Clang User Manual]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UsersManual.html
[Cross-compilation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross_compiler

## Linkers

The NDK uses LLD for linking. The linker is installed to
`<NDK>/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/<host-tag>/bin/<triple>-ld`.

Note: It is usually not necessary to invoke the linkers directly since Clang
will do so automatically. Clang will also automatically link CRT objects and
default libraries and set up other target-specific options, so it is generally
better to use Clang for linking.

[Issue 70838247]: https://issuetracker.google.com/70838247

## Binutils

LLVM's binutils tools are installed to the NDK at
`<NDK>/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/<host-tag>/bin/llvm-<tool>`. These include but
are not limited to:

* llvm-ar
* llvm-objcopy
* llvm-objdump
* llvm-readelf
* llvm-strip

All LLVM tools are capable of handling every target architecture. Unlike Clang,
no `-target` argument is required for these tools, so they should behave
correctly when used as drop-in replacements for their GNU equivalents. Some
tools may optionally accept a `-target` argument, but if omitted they will
select the correct target based on the input files.

Note that `llvm-as` is **not** an equivalent of GNU `as`, but rather a tool for
assembling LLVM IR. If you are currently using `as` directly, you will need to
migrate to using `clang` as a driver for building assembly.  See [Clang
Migration Notes] for advice on fixing assembly to be LLVM compatible.

Note that by default `/usr/bin/as` is used by Clang if the
`-fno-integrated-as` argument is used, which is almost certainly not
what you want!

[Clang Migration Notes]: ClangMigration.md

## Sysroot

The Android sysroot is installed to
`<NDK>/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/<host-tag>/sysroot` and contains the headers,
libraries, and CRT object files for each Android target.

Headers can be found in the `usr/include` directory of the sysroot. Target
specific include files are installed to `usr/include/<triple>`. When using
Clang, it is not necessary to include these directories explicitly; Clang will
automatically select the sysroot. If using a compiler other than Clang, ensure
that the target-specific include directory takes precedence over the
target-generic directory.

Libraries are found in the `usr/lib/<triple>` directory of the sysroot.
Version-specific libraries are installed to `usr/lib/<triple>/<API-level>`. As
with the header files, when using Clang it is not necessary to include these
directories explicitly; the sysroot will be automatically selected. If using a
compiler other than Clang, ensure that the version-specific library directory
takes precedence over the version-generic directory.

## Libraries

The NDK contains three types of libraries. Static libraries have a .a file
extension and are linked directly into app binaries. Shared libraries have a .so
file extension and must be included in the app's APK if used. System stub
libraries are a special type of shared library that should not be included in
the APK. The system stub libraries define the interface of a library that is
provided by the Android OS but contain no implementation. They can be identified
by their .so file extension and their presence in `<NDK>/meta/system_libs.json`.
The entries in this file are a key/value pair that maps library names to the
first API level the library is introduced.

## Weak symbols for API definitions

See [Issue 837].

The Android APIs are exposed as strong symbols by default. This means that apps
must not directly refer to any APIs that were not available in their
`minSdkVersion`, even if they will not be called at runtime. The loader will
reject any library with strong references to symbols that are not present at
load time.

It is possible to expose Android APIs as weak symbols to alter this behavior to
more closely match the Java behavior, which many app developers are more
familiar with. The loader will allow libraries with unresolved references to
weak symbols to load, allowing those APIs to be safely called as long as they
are only called when the API is available on the device. Absent APIs will have a
`nullptr` address, so calling an unavailable API will segfault.

Note: APIs that are guaranteed to be available in the `minSdkVersion` (the API
level passed to Clang with `-target`) will always be strong references, even
with this option enabled.

This is not enabled by default because, unless used cautiously, this method is
prone to deferring build failures to run-time (and only on older devices, since
newer devices will have the API). The loader not prevent the library from
loading, but the function's address will be `nullptr` if the API is not
available (if the API is newer than the OS). The API availability should be
checked with `__builtin_available` before making the call:

```c++
if (__builtin_available(android 33, *)) {
  // Call some API that's only available in API 33+.
} else {
  // Use some fallback behavior, perhaps doing nothing.
}
```

Clang offers some protections for this approach via `-Wunguarded-availability`,
which will emit a warning unless the call to the API is guarded with
`__builtin_available`.

To enable this functionality, pass `-D__ANDROID_UNAVAILABLE_SYMBOLS_ARE_WEAK__`
to Clang when compiling. We **strongly** recommend forcing
`-Werror=unguarded-availability` when using this option.

We recommend making the choice of weak or strong APIs an option in your build
system. Most developers will likely prefer weak APIs as they are simpler than
using `dlopen`/`dlsym`, and as long as `-Werror=unguarded-availability` is used,
it should be safe. At the time of writing, the NDK's own build systems
(ndk-build and CMake) use strong API references by default, but that may change
in the future.

Known issues and limitations:

* Only symbols are affected, not libraries. The only way to conditionally depend
  on a library that is not available in the app's `minSdkVersion` is with
  `dlopen`. We do not know how to solve this in a backwards compatible manner.
* APIs in bionic (libc, libm, libdl) are not currently supported. See the bug
  for more information. If the source compatibility issues can be resolved, that
  will change in a future NDK release.
* Headers authored by third-parties (e.g. `vulkan.h`, which comes directly from
  Khronos) are not supported. The implementation of this feature requires
  annotation of all function declarations, and the upstream headers likely do
  not contain those annotations. Solutions to this problem are being
  investigated.

[Issue 837]: https://github.com/android/ndk/issues/837

## STL

### libc++

The STL provided by the NDK is [libc++]. Its headers are installed to
`<NDK>/sysroot/usr/include/c++/v1`. This STL is used by default. This STL comes
in both a static and shared variant. The shared variant is used by default. To
use the static variant, pass `-static-libstdc++` when linking. If using the
shared variant, libc++_shared.so must be included in the APK. This library is
installed to `<NDK>/sysroot/usr/lib/<triple>`.

Warning: There are a number of things to consider when selecting between the
shared and static STLs. See the [Important Considerations] section of the C++
Support document for more details.

There are version-specific libc++.so and libc++.a libraries installed to
`<NDK>/sysroot/usr/lib/<triple>/<version>`. These are not true libraries but
[implicit linker scripts]. They inform the linker how to properly link the STL
for the given version. These scripts handle the inclusion of any libc++
dependencies if necessary. Linker scripts should not be included in the APK.

Build systems should prefer to let Clang link the STL. If not using Clang, the
version scripts should be used. Linking libc++ and its dependencies manually
should only be used as a last resort.

Note: Linking libc++ and its dependencies explicitly may be necessary to defend
against exception unwinding bugs caused by improperly built dependencies (see
[Issue 379]). If not dependent on stack unwinding (the usual reason being that
the application does not make use of C++ exceptions) or if no dependencies were
improperly built, this is not necessary. If needed, link the libraries as listed
in the linker script and be sure to follow the instructions in [Unwinding].

[Important Considerations]: https://developer.android.com/ndk/guides/cpp-support#important_considerations
[Issue 379]: https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/379
[implicit linker scripts]: https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/ld/Scripts.html
[libc++]: https://libcxx.llvm.org/

### System STL

The legacy "system STL" is also included, but it will be removed in a future NDK
release. It is not in fact an STL; it contains only the barest C++ library
support: the C++ versions of the C library headers and basic C++ runtime support
like `new` and `delete`. Its headers are installed to
`<NDK>/toolchains/llvm/prebuilt/<host-tag>/include/c++/4.9.x` and its library is
the libstdc++.so system stub library. To use this STL, use the
`-stdlib=libstdc++` flag.

TODO: Shouldn't it be installed to sysroot like libc++?

Note: The system STL will likely be removed in a future NDK release.

### No STL

To avoid using the STL at all, pass `-nostdinc++` when compiling and
`-nostdlib++` when linking. This is not necessary when using `clang`, only when
using `clang++`.

## Sanitizers

The NDK supports [Address Sanitizer] (ASan). This tool is similar to Valgrind in
that it diagnoses memory bugs in a running application, but ASan is much faster
than Valgrind (roughly 50% performance compared to an unsanitized application).

To use ASan, pass `-fsanitize=address` when both compiling and linking. The
sanitizer runtime libraries are installed to `<clang resource dir>/lib/linux`.
The Clang resource directory is given by `clang -print-resource-dir`. The
library is named `libclang_rt.asan-<arch>-android.so`. This library must be
included in the APK. A [wrap.sh] file must also be included in the APK. A
premade wrap.sh file for ASan is installed to `<NDK>/wrap.sh`.

Note: wrap.sh is only available for [debuggable] APKs running on Android Oreo
(API 26) or higher. ASan can still be used devices prior to Oreo but at least
Lollipop (API 21) if the device has been rooted. Direct users to the
[AddressSanitizerOnAndroid] document for instructions on using this method.

[Address Sanitizer]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AddressSanitizer.html
[AddressSanitizerOnAndroid]: https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizerOnAndroid#run-time-flags
[debuggable]: https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/manifest/application-element#debug
[wrap.sh]: https://developer.android.com/ndk/guides/wrap-script

## Additional Required Arguments

Note: It is a bug that any of these need to be specified by the build system.
All flags discussed in this section should be automatically selected by Clang,
but they are not yet. Check back in a future NDK release to see if any can be
removed from your build system.

For x86 targets prior to Android Nougat (API 24), `-mstackrealign` is needed to
properly align stacks for global constructors. See [Issue 635].

Android requires [Position-independent executables] beginning with API 21. Clang
builds PIE executables by default. If invoking the linker directly or not using
Clang, use `-pie` when linking.

Android Studio's LLDB debugger uses a binary's build ID to locate debug
information. To ensure that LLDB works with a binary, pass an option like
`-Wl,--build-id=sha1` to Clang when linking. Other `--build-id=` modes are OK,
but avoid a plain `--build-id` argument when using LLD, because Android Studio's
version of LLDB doesn't recognize LLD's default 8-byte build ID. See [Issue
885].

The unwinder used for crash handling on Android devices prior to API 29 cannot
correctly unwind binaries built with `-Wl,--rosegment`. This flag is enabled by
default when using LLD, so if using LLD and targeting devices older than API 29
you must pass `-Wl,--no-rosegment` when linking for correct stack traces in
logcat. See [Issue 1196].

[Issue 635]: https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/635
[Issue 885]: https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/885
[Issue 906]: https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/906
[Issue 1196]: https://github.com/android/ndk/issues/1196
[Position-independent executables]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Position-independent_code#Position-independent_executables

## Useful Arguments

### Dependency Management

It is recommended that `-Wl,--exclude-libs,<library file name>` be used for each
static library linked. This causes the linker to give symbols imported from a
static library hidden [visibility]. This prevents a binary from unintentionally
re-exporting an API other than its own. If the intent is to re-export all the
symbols in a static library, `-Wl,--whole-archive <library>
-Wl,--no-whole-archive` should be used to ensure that the whole archive is
preserved. By default, only symbols in used sections will be included in the
linked binary.

[visibility]: https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/Visibility

### Controlling Binary Size

To minimize the size of an APK, it may be desirable to use the `-Oz`
optimization mode. This will generate somewhat slower code than `-O2` or `-O3`,
but it will be smaller.

Note: `-Os` behavior is not the same with Clang as it is with GCC. Clang's `-Oz`
behaves similarly to GCC's `-Os`. `-Os` with Clang is a middle ground between
size and speed optimizations.

To aid the linker in removing as much unused code as possible, the compiler
flags `-ffunction-sections` and `-fdata-sections` may be used. These flags
should only be used in conjunction with the `-Wl,--gc-sections` linker flag.
Failing to use `-Wl,--gc-sections` will cause the former flags to *increase*
output size. The linker is only able to discard unused sections, so it can only
discard at per-function or per-variable granularity if each is in its own
section.

While `-Wl,--gc-sections` should always be used, whether or not to enable
`-ffunction-sections` and `-fdata-sections` depends on how the object file being
compiled is expected to be used. If it will be used in a shared library then all
of its [public symbols] will be preserved and the additional overhead of placing
each item in its own section may make the shared library *larger* rather than
smaller. If it will be used only in a static library or an executable then it
will depend on how much of the resulting object file is expected to be unused.

[public symbols]: #dependency-management

#### RELR and relocation packing

Note that each of the flags below will prevent the library or executable from
loading on older devices. If your `minSdkVersion` is at least the supported API
level, these flags are typically beneficial. A future release of the NDK will
likely enable this by default based on the `minSdkVersion` passed to Clang. See
[Issue 909] for more information.

Beginning with API level 23 it is possible to compress the relation data in
libraries and executables. Libraries with large numbers of relocations will
benefit from this. Enable with `-Wl,--pack-dyn-relocs=android` at link time.

API level 28 adds support for relative relocations (RELR) which can further
reduce the size of relocations. Enable with `-Wl,--pack-dyn-relocs=android+relr`
at link time. API levels 28 and 29 predate the standardization of this feature
in ELF, so for those API levels also pass `-Wl,--use-android-relr-tags` at link
time.

[Issue 909]: https://github.com/android/ndk/issues/909

### Helpful Warnings

It is recommended that build systems promote the following warnings to errors.
These warnings indicate either a bug or undefined behavior, the latter of which
Clang will usually turn into a bug.

 * `-Werror=return-type`: A non-void function is missing a return statement.
   Clang may "optimize" this function to fall through into the next one.
 * `-Werror=int-to-pointer-cast` and `-Werror=pointer-to-int-cast`: These
   indicate bugs that will affect the 64-bit version of the application.
 * `-Werror=implicit-function-declaration`: Undeclared functions may be inferred
   to have a return type of `int` in C. For functions that return a pointer, the
   return type will be silently truncated to a 32-bit `int`, resulting in bugs
   that will affect the 64-bit version of the application.

For more information on Clang's supported arguments, see the [Clang User
Manual].

### Hardening

#### Stack protectors

It is recommented to build all code with `-fstack-protector-strong`. This causes
the compiler to emit stack guards to protect against security vulnerabilities
caused by buffer overruns.

Note: ndk-build and the NDK's CMake toolchain file enable this option by
default.

#### Fortify

FORTIFY is a set of extensions to the C standard library that tries to catch the
incorrect use of standard functions, such as `memset`, `sprintf`, and `open`.
Where possible, runtime bugs will be diagnosed as errors at compile-time. If not
provable at compile-time, a run-time check is used. Note that the specific set
of APIs checked depends on the `minSdkVersion` used, since run-time support is
required. See [FORTIFY in Android] for more details.

To enable this feature in your build define `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2` when compiling.

Note: ndk-build and the NDK's CMake toolchain file enable this option by
default.

[FORTIFY in Android]: https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2017/04/fortify-in-android.html

### Version script validation

LLD will not raise any errors for symbols named in version scripts that are
absent from the library. This is either a mistake in the version script, or a
missing definition in the library. To have LLD diagnose these errors, pass
`-Wl,--no-undefined-version` when linking.

## Common Issues

### Unwinding
[Unwinding]: #unwinding

The NDK uses LLVM's libunwind. libunwind is needed to provide C++ exception
handling support and C's `__attribute__((cleanup))`. The unwinder is linked
automatically by Clang, and is built with hidden visibility to avoid shared
libraries re-exporting the unwind interface.

Until NDK r23, libgcc was the unwinder for all architectures other than 32-bit
ARM, and even 32-bit ARM used libgcc to provide compiler runtime support.
Libraries built with NDKs older than r23 by build systems that did not follow
the advice in this document may re-export that incompatible unwinder. In this
case those libraries can prevent the correct unwinder from being used by your
build, resulting in crashes or incorrect behavior at runtime.

The best way to avoid this problem is to ensure all libraries in the application
were built with NDK r23 or newer, but even libraries built by older NDKs are
unlikely to have this problem.

For build systems that want to protect their users against improperly built
libraries, read on. **Neither ndk-build nor CMake make this effort.**

To protect against improperly built libraries, build systems can ensure that
shared libraries are always linked **after** static libraries, and explicitly
link the unwinder between each group. The linker will prefer definitions that
appear sooner in the link order, so libunwind appearing **before** the shared
libraries will prevent the linker from considering the incompatible unwinder
provided by the broken library. libunwind must be linked after other static
libraries to provide the unwind interface to those static libraries.

The following link order will protect against incorrectly built dependencies:

 1. crtbegin
 2. object files
 3. static libraries
 4. libunwind
 5. shared libraries
 6. crtend

Unless using `-nostdlib` when linking, crtend and crtbegin will be linked
automatically by Clang. libunwind can be manually linked with `-lunwind`.

## Windows Specific Issues

### Command Line Length Limits

Command line length limits on Windows are short enough that they can pose
problems when building large projects. Commands executed via cmd.exe are limited
to [8,191 characters] and commands executed with `CreateProcess` are limited to
[32,768 characters].

To work around these issues, Clang, the linkers, and the archiver all accept a
response file that specifies the input files in place of specifying each input
explicitly on the command line. Response files are identified on the command
line with a "@" prefix and are formatted as space separated arguments. For
example:

    $ ar crsD liba.a @inputs.rsp

If the contents of `inputs.rsp` are `a.o b.o c.o` then `ar` will insert `a.o`,
`b.o`, and `c.o` into `liba.a`.

[8,191 characters]: https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/830473/command-prompt-cmd-exe-command-line-string-limitation
[32,768 characters]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/desktop/api/processthreadsapi/nf-processthreadsapi-createprocessa

### Path Length Limits

Windows paths are limited to 260 characters, including the drive letter, colon,
backslash, and terminating null. See Microsoft's documentation on [path length
limits] for possible solutions.

[path length limits]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/desktop/fileio/naming-a-file#maximum-path-length-limitation

### Performance Differences

Our experience shows that builds on Windows are generally slower than they are
on Linux. The cost of `CreateProcess` in comparison to `fork` accounts for much
of the difference, so it is best to minimize process creation in your build
system.

File system performance can also make a large difference. This also appears to
be the reason that Mac, while it has better build performance than Windows,
still underperforms Linux.

Windows and Mac users will see optimum build performance in a Linux VM.
